Research on Child and Adolescent Psychopathology (2024) 52:487–489
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-024-01181-1
than heterogeneous symptoms and syndromes. Those who 
support RDoC emphasize that the revolutionary advances in 
care and corresponding increased life expectancy for medi -
cal patients, e.g., those with oncological and cardiac diag -
noses, came from deep understanding of pathophysiological 
mechanisms. The fields of psychology and psychiatry have 
yet to demonstrate comparable breakthroughs and, to date, 
the RDoC framework represents the most plausible and 
comprehensive plan toward that end.
The RDoC-informed goal of identifying neurobiologi -
cal mechanisms represents a departure from the traditional 
emphasis on the subjective experience in psychiatry, which 
has led to concerns that this approach represents “psychiatry 
without psyche” (Hershenberg & Goldfried, 2015 ; Parnas, 
2014 ; Whooley, 2014 ). Indeed, the field of psychology has 
always stood apart from traditional medicine in its empha -
sis on subjective experiences. As noted by Dr. Maté (Maté, 
2011 ), this distinction is illustrated by the way that the term 
“symptom” refers to a patient’s “felt experience” in medi -
cine, but constitutes an “external observation” in psychol -
ogy. Critics of RDoC also point out that the emphasis on 
understanding as a means to improving treatment could 
delay development of systems of care that benefit groups of Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDoC) (National Institute of 
Mental Health, 2009 ) were proposed by the National Insti -
tute of Mental Health in 2009 to offer a nuanced, dimension-
based alternative to the psychological categories delineated 
in diagnostic manuals, i.e. the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) and International Clas -
sification of Diseases (ICD) (Cuthbert & Insel, 2013 ; Insel et 
al., 2010 ). The RDoC framework proposes that by measur -
ing domains of positive valence, negative valence, arousal/
regulatory, sensorimotor, cognitive, and social processes at 
the individual level, the psychiatric sciences will be better 
positioned to identify putative neurobiological elements, 
circuits, and drivers of psychopathology. Thus, RDoC sets 
the stage for a transdiagnostic system of care in which the 
targets are specific molecular and neural mechanisms, rather 
 Anne Arnett
Anne.Arnett@childrens.harvard.edu
 Jason Fogler
Jason.Fogler@childrens.harvard.edu
1 Boston Children’s Hospital & Harvard Medical School, 2 
Brookline Place, 4th Floor, Boston, MA 02445, USAAbstract
There is growing consensus that diagnostic labels are insufficient to describe the individual child’s psychiatric profile, 
much less inform the precise combination of interventions that will minimize the impact of risk and/or bolster protec -
tive factors over the course of a particular child’s development. Moreover, investigations of neurobiological and genetic 
mechanisms associated with psychopathology have revealed considerable cross-diagnostic overlap, undermining the valid -
ity of models that propose a 1:1 relationship between risk and psychiatric disorder. Accordingly, recent publications have 
advocated for neurodevelopmental models that utilize trait-based measurement, as well as increased emphasis on integra -
tion of biological and experiential mechanisms. Despite an expanding body of literature supporting this conceptual shift, 
the practical implications remain unclear. In this special issue, we compile a collection of novel empirical research papers 
and reviews that build on the trans-diagnostic principles of the RDoC framework.
Keywords  RDoC · Transdiagnostic · Clinical psychology · Child and adolescent psychopathologyAccepted: 16 February 2024 / Published online: 27 February 2024
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science +Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2024Clinical Psychology in the Era of Research Diagnostic Criteria 
(RDoC): Reconciling Individually-Focused Practice with a Broader 
Biopsychosocial Context
Anne Arnett1 · Jason Fogler1
1 3Research on Child and Adolescent Psychopathology (2024) 52:487–489individuals with common functional impairments, regard -
less of etiology. This particular concern has been publicized 
by one of the most visible leaders and original proponents 
of RDoC, Dr. Tom Insel, who directed NIMH from 2002 
to 2015 (Insel, 2022 ). In this special edition, we have chal -
lenged researchers to apply the RDoC framework to clini -
cally relevant issues in pediatric psychology and psychiatry, 
testing the utility of this approach in pediatric mental health.
The enclosed studies highlight the myriad, multidis -
ciplinary tools available to clinical scientists keen on 
quantifying RDoC domains that putatively underlie psy -
chopathology. Consistent with RDoC’s prioritization of 
behavioral and neural circuits (Cuthbert & Insel, 2013 ), 
several studies in the collection utilized electroencephalog -
raphy (EEG) to measure event related potentials (ERPs) in 
association with continuous behavioral measures. Hosch et 
al. (this volume) modeled N2 ERP amplitude as a putative 
marker of externalizing behaviors in childhood, noting that 
laboratory measures of inhibitory control partially medi -
ated this brain-behavior association. The benefit of this 
multilevel approach is that while N2 amplitudes may be 
interpreted as a neurocognitive etiology, inhibitory control 
is the more obvious intervention target. In contrast, and in 
keeping with the fourth pillar of RDoC outlined by Cuthbert 
and Insel ( 2013 ), Figuracion et al. (this volume) modeled 
error-related ERPs as outcome variables, with temperament 
(emotionally regulated versus dysregulated) and stimulus 
valence (negative versus positive) as independent variables. 
These researchers demonstrated that individual emotional 
valence, which has been highlighted by the RDoC frame -
work, interacts with environmental valence, a less defined 
construct, to shape cortical functioning. Although this analy -
sis was completed within a clinically-defined sample of ado -
lescents with ADHD, the approach moved beyond simply 
predicting a diagnosis to understanding the brain-behavior-
environment interactions. This finding could be extended 
to investigations of individuals with elevated posttraumatic 
stress, depression, and anxiety. Babinski et al. (this volume) 
also used ERPs as a means to explain individual variability 
within traditionally defined psychological constructs. In a 
model boasting strong potential for clinically translational 
impact, this study found that enhanced cortical sensitivity to 
social (but not monetary) reinforcement was associated with 
higher levels of personality pathology among adolescent 
females with high rates of mental health disorders. Thus, 
this investigation identified a candidate biological marker 
of mental health risk (reward positivity ERP) that dovetails 
with a treatment target (social reward sensitivity).
Using a uniquely objective measurement approach, 
Somers and colleagues (this volume) described physiologi -
cal and emotional fluctuations among infant-mother dyads 
from low-income, Mexican-origin households. Among infants, high, stable respiratory sinus activity (RSA) was 
predictive of positive affect and protective against negative 
affect; moreover, high-RSA infants were most responsive 
to their mothers’ own affective changes. This investiga -
tion therefore presents a measurable, biological moderator 
of parenting practices on infant mental health. Similarly, 
Lorenzo et al. (this volume) examined transactional effects 
of parenting through a moderated mediation model. In a lon -
gitudinal investigation of children followed from age three 
through adolescence, the association between early exuber -
ant temperament and later ADHD symptoms was explained 
by childhood executive functioning, but only among chil -
dren whose parents used a low directiveness parenting style.
Aitkin and colleagues (this volume) remind us that behav -
ior often varies across social contexts, and this variability 
may be leveraged toward a more comprehensive individual 
assessment. This study found that parent-, teacher-, and 
youth self-informant ratings increased predictive validity 
for functional outcomes in children and adolescents when 
modeled as individual predictors rather than in a standard -
ized or aggregated form. Gornik et al. (this volume) likewise 
directed our attention to environmental context, framing 
opportunity as a contextual factor in which to better under -
stand cognitive development. This longitudinal study found 
a potential cumulative effect of low opportunity on language 
development, providing a poignant reminder that biological 
markers do not exist in a vacuum, and that the longitudinal 
stability of RDoC constructs should also be well defined, 
particularly in developmental research.
The fifth pillar of RDoC reviewed by Cuthbert and Insel 
(2013 ) emphasizes that behavioral constructs must map 
onto biological ones. Wang et al. (this volume) identified 
multiple profiles of adolescent temperament and behavior 
that were not only predictive of alcohol use in adulthood, 
but were also heritable. This approach therefore validated 
the identified behavioral constructs while simultaneously 
providing a window into the ways that alcohol use problems 
may pass through families.
A number of studies in this collection underscore the 
necessity of measuring RDoC constructs in a dimensional 
way, i.e. examining variance at both ends of the spectrum 
(second pillar, Cuthbert & Insel, 2013 . Edmunds et al. (this 
volume) reported that children with autism spectrum dis -
order differed from typically developing children on one 
end of the irritability dimension (soothability) but not the 
other (frustration). Elahi and colleagues (this volume) high -
lighted how meaningful subtypes of ADHD-related symp -
tomatology could be stratified by the dimensions of “hot” 
and “cold” executive functioning, and that treatment could 
be tailored accordingly. Relatedly, Peisch et al. (this vol -
ume) found that the association between family liability 
1 3488Research on Child and Adolescent Psychopathology (2024) 52:487–489for ADHD and youth ADHD outcomes was weaker among 
youth with strong effortful control.
The term “transdiagnostic” is frequently invoked to place 
research designs in an RDoC framework. The implication of 
this term is that a biomarker, treatment target, or continuous 
measurement tool should demonstrate measurement invari -
ance across DSM-based diagnoses. Spellun and colleagues 
(this volume) addressed this issue among children who are 
deaf and hard of hearing by examining whether the Behav -
ior Assessment System for Children-3 was a valid tool for 
measuring psychiatric and adaptive behaviors in this clini -
cal group.
This collection of studies highlights how well the RDoC 
framework can be applied to the field of developmental 
psychopathology. In particular, the joint consideration of 
psychological and biological correlates of mental health 
and functioning has already expanded what we know about 
child mental health. We are not the first to suggest models 
for reconciling RDoC with a more psychologically minded 
approach to mental distress (Conradt et al., 2021 ; Garber 
& Bradshaw, 2020 ; Lilienfeld, 2014 ). Yet, the astute reader 
will also recognize that nearly all studies in the collection 
were unable to completely disentangle their work from 
DSM-based diagnostic categories. This is in direct conflict 
with the last of the seven pillars of RDoC defined by Cuth -
bert and Insel ( 2013 ), which notes that a pitfall of the cur -
rent diagnostic nosology is its inflexibility with respect to 
incorporating new knowledge as it is gained. Nonetheless, 
the studies published herein address the practical objec -
tive of the RDoC initiative, which is to translate improved 
understanding of etiology and mechanisms to more effec -
tive clinical care, such as preventative interventions and 
individualized treatments. Moreover, much of this work 
demonstrates a potentially more practical application of 
RDoC, wherein the combination of biopsychosocial and 
diagnostic measurement serves to increase the flexibility of, 
and thereby strengthen, our existing diagnostic nosology.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors have no conflicts of interest to dis -
close.References
Conradt, E., Crowell, S. E., & Cicchetti, D. (2021). Using development 
and psychopathology principles to inform the Research Domain 
Criteria (RDoC) framework. Development and Psychopathology , 
33(5), 1521–1525.
Cuthbert, B. N., & Insel, T. R. (2013). Toward the future of psychiatric 
diagnosis: The seven pillars of RDoC. BMC Medicine , 11(1), 1–8.
Garber, J., & Bradshaw, C. P. (2020). Developmental psychopathology 
and the research domain criteria: Friend or foe? Journal of Clini -
cal Child & Adolescent Psychology , 49(3), 341–352.
Hershenberg, R., & Goldfried, M. R. (2015). Implications of RDoC for 
the research and practice of psychotherapy. Behavior Therapy , 
46(2), 156–165.
Insel, T. (2022). Healing: Our path from mental illness to mental 
health . Penguin.
Insel, T., Cuthbert, B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Pine, D. S., Quinn, 
K., & Wang, P. (2010). Research domain criteria (RDoC): Toward 
a new classification framework for research on mental disorders  
(V ol. 167, pp. 748–751). Am Psychiatric Assoc.
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2014). The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC): An 
analysis of methodological and conceptual challenges. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy , 62, 129–139.
Maté, G. (2011). Scattered minds: The origins and healing of attention 
deficit disorder . Vintage Canada.
National Institute of Mental Health, N (2009). About the RDoC 
Framework. Retrieved from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/research/
research-funded-by-nimh/rdoc/about-rdoc .
Parnas, J. (2014). The RDoC program: Psychiatry without psyche? 
World Psychiatry , 13(1), 46.
Whooley, O. (2014). Nosological reflections: The failure of DSM-5, 
the emergence of RDoC, and the decontextualization of mental 
distress. Society and Mental Health , 4(2), 92–110.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris -
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law. 
1 3489